---
title: C IO
section: Section2
prev: 16-structs.html
next: 18-c-program.html
...

# IO in C

We have one last topic to cover in C to match everything we covered in Python:
Input and Output. So far, we have seen one method for input, `argc` and `argv`,
and one method for output, `printf`. But those are fairly limited. The first
function we need is something similar to Python's `input` function, which reads
user input from the command line.

## Scanf

This function is `scanf`. It functions very similarly to `printf`, but reads
values into variables instead of out of them. Also, it needs the address of the
variable instead of the variable itself. In code,

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv) {
    int x, ret;
    ret = scanf("%d", &x);
    printf("The value entered was: %d\n", x);
    printf("The value returned was: %d\n", ret);
}
```

When we compile and run this we can try a couple different inputs,

```bash
$ ./a.out
10
The entered value was: 10
The returned value was: 1
$ ./a.out
hey
The entered value was: 0
The returned value was: 0
```

In our first attempt, we input a reasonable integer value, `10`. `scanf` was
able to read that as an integer, and so it set `x` equal to `10`. The return
value of `scanf` is the number of variables it successfully read. In the first
example, that is 1 for `10` bound to `x`. In the second example, `scanf` fails
to read `hey` as an `int`. The value of `x` is then whatever it was before the
call to `scanf`. In our case, it was uninitialized. Finally, `scanf` returns 0
because it couldn't read an integer into `x` from the input.

## Opening Files

Working with the command line is useful, but often we need to interact with
files. Files allow us to make information "persistent." That is, it will be
there after the program ends and even after the computer is restarted. We might
use this to create a log of events inside the program or read in data.

To work with a file, we first have to open it. The functions we need all come
from `stdio.h`, so we need to make sure to include it at the top of our file.

```c
// Create a variable that will represent our file
FILE *file;

file = fopen("file.txt", "r");

if (file == NULL) {
    printf("Can't open specified file\n");
    exit(1);
}

do_something(file);

fclose(file);
```

This pattern will come every time you want to work with a file. You declare a
variable of type ``FILE *``. `FILE` is a structure inside of `stdio.h` that
represents a set of information that is needed to work with files.

Next, you set the variable to the value returned by `fopen(filepath,
permissions)`. This function opens the file at `filepath`, returning a pointer
to the new `FILE` struct that represents the file. The permissions can be `"r"`,
`"w"`, or `"a"` for reading, writing, and appending respectively. If you only
want to get the information from a file, the you only need to read it. If you
would like to create a new file or write over what is already there, then you
choose `"w"`. If you would like to add new information, but only at the end, use
`"a"`. Appending just means "adding at the end."

Sometimes, the computer can't open the file. For example, you might try to write
to the file `"data/test.c"`, but the `data` directory does not exist. C can
create the file `test.c` only if all the parent directories already exist. Or
you might ask C to read a file that doesn't exist. In all of these cases, the
pointer returned will be `NULL`. If you try to then use the `NULL` pointer, your
program will end with an error. Thus, we have to make sure it succeeded.

Once you ensure that the file pointer is not `NULL`, you can use it as you
please. We will look at functions to do that shortly.

Finally, you need to make sure to `fclose` the file. Managing your resources is
an important part of C. Closing the file cleans up the memory we used. It frees
the `FILE` structure and lets other programs have access to the file again.

## IO with Files

C has a very simple naming structure for the functions we need. Instead of
`printf` and `scanf`, we have `fprintf` and `fscanf` for files. They work
exactly the same, except the first argument is the file you want to work with.

```c
do_something(FILE *file) {
    int x = 10;

    // Write to file (needs "w" or "a" permission)
    fprintf(file, "The value of x is: %d", x);
    
    // Read from file (needs "r" permission)
    // Expect a line in `file` that looks like
    // x: 10
    fscanf(file, "x: %d", &x);
}
```

## Best Practice

Reading from files is unfortunately complicated. We can't really be sure of what
the information looks like or even if there is anything there. There are many
different errors that could happen, so to make it a little easier and safer we
use a common pattern.

Instead of reading directly from the file, we read as much of a single line as
we can into an array, and then process the array using `sscanf`. Just like
`fscanf`, `sscanf` works like `scanf`, except for strings instead of the command
line or files. First, let's see how it works,

```c
do_something(file) {
    // An array to hold a line of input
    // holds up to 31 characters and a null byte
    char buffer[32];
    int x;

    // Safely get a line from the file
    if (fgets(buffer, sizeof(buffer), file) != NULL) {
        // Now scan that line for input
        sscanf(buffer, "x: %d", &x);
    }
```

`fgets` takes a place to store the result, the number of bytes it can read, and
the source file to read from. In this case, we are reading from `file` into
`buffer` and can read 32 bytes from the file, making sure that the final null
byte fits in our buffer.

This small pattern helps us separate error cases. First, `fgets` will return
NULL if there is nothing else to read in the file. Second, `fgets` helps protect
us from overflowing our buffer that we allocated for the string. If the line is
longer than 31 bytes, we only take the initial part. If needed, we could do some
extra processing to handle that case. You might walk down the string looking for
`\n` to make sure you have the whole thing.

Once those cases are handled, it is much easier to then process the string for
data. We know that we do have a string, it just might not match our
expectations. If you knew the file could have lines that looked like either `x:
<number>` or `y: <number>`, you could just try to `sscanf` both.

```c
if (sscanf(buffer, "x: %d", &x) != 0) {
    // do something with x
} else if (sscanf(buffer, "y: %d", &y) != 0) {
    // do something with y
} else {
    printf("error, did not understand line: %s", buffer);
}
```

The reason the `if` statement works is that `sscanf` returns the number of
format variables successfully matched. If it returns 0, that means it failed.
It should return 1 because we only try to assign 1 variable.

## Special Files

It turns out that `printf` is just a special case of `fprintf`. There are three
files that you always have access to, `stdin`, `stdout`, and `stderr`. These are
short for "standard input", "standard output", and "standard error". `printf` is
the same as `fprintf(stdout, ...`. Similarly, `scanf` is just `fscanf(stdin,
...`.

We won't need to specifically use these three very often, but it is good
practice to print your errors on `stderr`. You won't be able to tell the
difference just looking at output on the command line, but there are ways to
separate `stdout` and `stderr` that make users' life nicer. Sometimes programs
spew out a large amount of information and you only care about the errors. In
that case, it is nice to have separate streams of information.
